---
layout: default
title: Gnome OPW Projects
categories: {categories}
created: 2013-04-16
changed: 2013-07-26
post_author: OTI
lang: en
---
  <h2>Projects</h2><p><strong>Mesh Administration UI</strong><br />Rebuild OpenWRT&#39;s luci administrative front end based on input from users and data from usability testing. Will require collaboration with field team, quickstart developers, and users. Contact Seamus Tuohy (s2e AT opentechinstitute DOT org or elation on irc.freenode.net) to get started on a plan!</p><p><strong>Build out Desktop Commotion Bundle</strong><br />Design and/or implement a framework to unify the existing network manager features with desktop Commotion tools and other applications. The framework should provide users a single application to access all available commotion tools, apps, and settings, and provide developers a standard location to connect to other commotion features. The framework should take into account existing Commotion UI across all platforms, upstream OS conventions, and user requirements. Contact Dan Staples (danstaples AT opentechinstitute DOT org or dismantl on irc.freenode.net) to get started on a plan!</p><p><strong>Commotion Feature Tree</strong><br />Design and implement a web-based feature tree to show planned and implemented features for each Commotion package. The design should should give at-a-glance information on the three core Commotion tenets (connectivity, usability, and security), and should link to the appropriate system architecture documents for those requiring detailed technical information. Contact Seamus Tuohy (s2e AT opentechinstitute DOT org or elation on irc.freenode.net) to get started on a plan!</p><p><strong>OpenWRT Open Source Application Integration</strong><br />This one or two intern task will be in three parts. The first is to find open-source applications that fit our list of services that are most needed over the mesh. The second part of the task will be to create OpenWRT packages of those applications with pre-configured mesh-focused configuration files. Lastly, the intern will create documentation to guide users in making their own OpenWRT packages and configuring those applications for mesh environments. Contact Dan Staples (danstaples AT opentechinstitute DOT org or dismantl on irc.freenode.net) to get started on a plan!</p><p><strong>Mesh Debugging</strong><br />This intern will spend three months becoming expert in debugging mesh networks. They will document different tools and techniques for users with an average level of technical expertise. The intern will work with their mentor to implement a GUI testing suite for mesh routers. The output of this period will be a series of blogs/documentation pages, and a GUI testing suite. This intern must have some familiarity with network debugging and troubleshooting, and be proficient with at least one higher level programming language. Contact Will Hawkins (hawkinsw AT opentechinstitute DOT org or hawkinsw on irc.freenode.net) to get started on a plan!</p><p><strong>Data collection tools</strong><br />The intern will research various network monitoring and reporting platforms (Zabbix, Zenoss, Nagios, simple SNMP, etc) to determine which is the most useful for debugging/monitoring mesh networks. The intern will work on OTI&#39;s deployment networks to actually implement a prototype monitoring system based upon the outcome of their research. Contact Will Hawkins (hawkinsw AT opentechinstitute DOT org or hawkinsw on irc.freenode.net) to get started on a plan!</p><h2>Application Process</h2><p>These projects are all eligible for inclusion in the Gnome Outreach Program for Women</p><ul><li>Read up on the <a href="https://live.gnome.org/OutreachProgramForWomen">outreach program</a>.</li><li>Look over our projects and task ideas above. If nothing there strikes your fancy then feel free to suggest one of your own using our <a href="https://code.commotionwireless.net/projects/commotion/issues">issue queue</a>, <a href="https://github.com/opentechinstitute">github repositories</a>, <a href="https://code.commotionwireless.net/projects/commotion/wiki">project wiki</a>, and <a href="http://commotionwireless.net">documentation</a> as a starting point. We love new ideas! Check back often, we&#39;re still adding tasks and projects!</li><li>Join the #commotion channel on irc.freenode.net and introduce yourself!</li><li>Contact the mentor of the project that you&#39;re interested in contributing to via IRC. Talk with them about how to get started.</li><li>Send your application to opw-list@gnome.org. Please be available and responsive throughout the application period so we can work with you on improving it.</li></ul> 
